# graph-partitioning-algorithms
=============================

This package contains multi-way partitioning algorithms: FMS
(Fiduccia-Mattheyses-Sanchis), PLM (Partitioning by Locked Moves), PFM
(Partitioning by Free Moves) as detailed in [DaAy97]. 

## THE GRAPH PARTITIONING PROBLEM

The graph partitioning problem is defined as follows: Given an input
graph, partition it into a given number of almost equal-sized parts in
such a way that the cutsize, i.e., the sum of the edge weights whose
end vertices are in different parts, is minimized . This problem has
many variations as well as important applications in many
areas. Unfortunately, the problem is NP-hard so the algorithms in this
package are heuristics (but they work very very well).

A related problem is the hypergraph partitioning problem. If you do
not know what a hypergraph is, remember this: In a graph, you have
vertices and edges, where every edge connects two vertices; in a
hypergraph, you have vertices and hyperedges, where every hyperedge
connects two or more vertices. Since hypergraphs can model electronic
circuits well, a hypergraph is often said to have cells and nets
instead of vertices and hyperedges. In a circuit cell where a net is
connected is called a pin. You may see the cell, net, and pin
terminology in my code.

## A SHORT HISTORY ON THESE ALGORITHMS

The basis for these algorithms go back to the Kernighan-Lin (KL)
algorithm for graph partitioning. The KL algorithm produces very good
partitions but it is slow. The Fiduccia-Mattheyses (FM) algorithm is
not only a faster version of the KL algorithm but it also generalizes
the KL algorithm to run on hypergraphs. Sanchis generalized the FM
algorithm from 2-way partitioning to multi-way partitioning. 

All these KL-based algorithms work in multiple passes over the number
of vertices; in each pass, these algorithms find the best destination
part for a vertex and lock this vertex from moving again in the rest
of the current pass. Realizing the limitations of this "locking"
mechanism, I devised ways to relax this mechanism, resulting in the
Partitioning by Locked Moves (PLM) algorithm and the Partitioning by
Free Moves (PFM) algorithm. The PLM algorithm still uses locking but
it goes through multiple phases of locking and unlocking within a pass
over the input graph. The PFM algorithm does not use locking at all;
it uses a way to penalize the moves to march towards a local
minimum. For more details, please refer to [DaAy97].

## MORE INTRODUCTION

I originally developed this package in C during my MSc study (around
1991-1993). Before putting this package on github, I converted my code
to ANSI C (c99) and cleaned it quite a bit. 

In my code, you may notice some biologically inspired variable names
such as 'population', 'chromosome', 'allele', etc. These names
actually come from genetic algorithms. During my MSc years, my
eventual goal was to implement graph and hypergraph partitioning using
genetic algorithms on a hypercube connected parallel computer (from
Intel). Once I discovered the limitations of the locking mechanism, I
changed my research direction towards what would become PLM and
PFM. By the way, I did still work on genetic algorithms but in a
different setting (applying genetic algorithms to synthesize
unsupervised learning algorithms).

This package is available on an "as is" basis. I do not say or imply
that it will be useful for whatever you want to do with it. It may
also contain bugs, and I assume no responsibility for any potential
problems associated with its use. You can use this package free of
charge in academic research and teaching. For any commercial use,
contact Ali Dasdan at ali_dasdan@yahoo.com. See the COPYRIGHT section
below.

## DIRECTORY STRUCTURE

At the top level, you see two directories: 'src' and 'input'. 'src'
contains all the source files and 'input' contains the input graphs
used for testing the executables. Under 'src', there is one directory,
called 'share', for the shared source files as well as one directory
for each algorithm: 'fms', 'plm', and 'pfm'.

## HOW TO BUILD

Under 'src', type 'make' (or 'gmake') to build each executable under
its own directory. The executables are all have .x extension:
ad_fms.x, ad_plm.x, and ad_pfm.x.

The output you expect to see with 'make' is shown in
'doc/make_build.out'.

## HOW TO RUN

Go to the respective directory for an algorithm and type the name of
one of the executables in your command line to get the usage
information. At minimum, each executable requires the input graph and
the number of parts to partition the hypergraph. PLM and PFM require
additional parameters to create different versions of them, which
trade off runtime for partition quality.

For example, a run of FMS (in 'ad_fms.x') to partition the input graph
'p9' into two parts will produce this output:

```
> ad_fms.x input/p9 2 123456
SEED = 123456 fname = input/p9
pass_no = 7 Final cutsize = 85 Check cutsize = 85
```

This output shows that FMS took 7 passes over the cells of the input
hypergraph 'hp9' when started with a seed of 123456. Note that
specifying a seed will make the results repeatable. FMS found a
cutsize of 85, which is correct as FMS and the other programs will
check every cutsize they report for correctness. That is, each of the
executables are self validating.

__NOTE__: When you run this program for a large number of parts (i.e.,
the 2nd argument on the command line), you may get a seg fault. The
reason seems to be the allocation of the 2D array 'partb' on the
stack. When I find time (hopefully soon), I will remove this weakness
by allocating partb dynamically on the heap.

## HOW TO TEST

Under 'src', type 'make test' to test each executable on the input
graphs under the 'input' directory. The result will be a 'pass' or a
'fail'.

The output you expect to see with 'make test' is shown in
'doc/make_test.out'.

## HOW TO CLEAN

Under 'src', type 'make clean' to clean all temporary files including
the object files and the executables.

The output you expect to see with 'make clean' is shown in
'doc/make_clean.out'.

## INPUT FILE FORMAT

The input file format is explained below using a very simple graph.

```
> cat input/p1
6
7
14
1 2 0 1
1 2 1 2
1 2 2 0
1 2 3 4
1 2 4 5
1 2 5 3
1 2 0 3
1
1
1
1
1
1
```

The first three lines give the number of vertices (or cells), the
number of edges (or nets), and the number of pins (or endpoints),
respectively. Thus, 'p1' has 6 vertices, 7 edges, and 14 pins.

The following 7 lines describe the edges, one edge per line. The first
number is the edge weight; the second number is the number of vertices
on an edge (always equal to 2 for graphs)); the third number is the
source vertex; and the fourth number is the target vertex. For
example, the first edge from vertex 0 to vertex 1 has a weight of 1.

The last 6 lines describe the vertex weights.

## REFERENCE

Please cite this reference if you use my programs in your research
work.

```
@article{DaAy97,
 author = {Ali Dasdan and C. Aykanat},
 title = {Two Novel Circuit Partitioning Algorithms Using Relaxed Locking},
 journal = {IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems (TCAD)},
 volume = {16},
 number = {2},
 year = {1997},
 pages = {169-178},
 url = {http://yoksis.bilkent.edu.tr/doi_getpdf/articles/10.1109-43.573831.pdf},
 }
```

## COPYRIGHT

COPYRIGHT C 1991 - Ali Dasdan

Permission to use for non-commercial purposes is granted provided that
proper acknowledgments are given. For a commercial licence, contact
Ali Dasdan at ali_dasdan@yahoo.com.

This software is provided on an "as is" basis, without warranties or
conditions of any kind, either express or implied including, without
limitation, any warranties or conditions of title, non-infringement,
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.

## END OF FILE

